University of Galway     
BI453 Biochemistry Final Year Research Project   
Author: Róisín Culligan    
Title: Assessing the Stability of Molecular Cancer Class Discovery using Non-Negative Matrix Factorisation    
Date: 22/03/2024

Abstract: In recent years, NMF has arisen as a powerful tool in computational biology, particularly in the field of cancer research. As an unsupervised machine learning technique, NMF can detect patterns in data without any prior knowledge. Gene expression data is particularly suitable for NMF due to its inherent non-negativity and high dimensionality. In the context of cancer biology, NMF consists of factorising a gene expression data matrix into two lower-rank matrices, a basis matrix, and a coefficient matrix, whilst adhering to a non-negativity constraint. The resulting matrices consist of interpretable and biologically relevant components and can be used for subsequent clustering analysis. However, the factorisation is not unique and consequently, clustering results and their associated interpretations may vary. A variety of methods have been used to tackle this problem. In this project, I demonstrate one such method, whereby maximum normalisation is used to scale each component of the factorised matrices ensuring that they all contribute proportionally to the clustering procedure. This improves the algorithm's ability to detect meaningful patterns in the data and was first demonstrated by Yang and Seoighe, in 2016 [1]. The results of this project showed that NMF with maximum normalisation increased the clustering performance for three out of four datasets and that its performance worsened when uniform noise was added. In addition, the findings illustrate the variation in clustering performance when samples are separated with respect to gender. Overall, the observations collectively outline the effectiveness and limitations of NMF in its application to cancer class discovery and highlight how using a stable model will lead to consistent clustering results which better facilitate accurate subtype classification.    

Results: This report demonstrated the efficacy of NMF in its application to molecular cancer class discovery. Observations showed that overall, NMF was more consistent in its clustering performance and robustness to noise after using maximum normalisation as a post-processing step. Variations in performance were also observed when samples were separated on the basis of sex. Based on the findings I conclude that while NMF performs well for most datasets, the stability of the method will decrease when data is subjected to high levels of noise and will likely increase when samples are more homogenous with respect to factors other than subtype.
